day 2 

----------

Security of SQL server platform (best practices) 

1. defence in depth approach 

a) Column level protection - sensitive data requires data identification, classfication like SSN, credit card numbers, phone numbers, finance account info, 
level the protection at the column level with minimal overhead to apply the protection for the app code. 

- Always encrypted -> used here randomized deterministic algo as applicable to encrypt the data over the network & at rest. 

- Dynamic data masking -> to obfuscate the data at column level when Always encrypted feature isn't sufficient. 

b) Row level protection 

RLS makes sure the users can only see the records that pertains to them. This gives the app record security without making significant changes to the app. 

-> should be using seperate schema for RLS objects : predicate functions, security policies. 

-> ALTER ANY SECURITY POLICY permission 

-> prevent the type conversion in predicate functions to avoid potential runtime errors. 

DBCC SHOW_STATISTICS -> reports the statistics on unfiltered data, and prevent the data leakage. 

c) File encryption 

TDE protects the data at the file level by providing encryption at rest to database file. TDE also ensures the database files, backup files and 
tempdb files cant be attached or read without proper certificates decrypting database files. 

Without TDE, provides real time I/O encryption of the data and log files. DEK can also be protected with a certificate. 

d) Audit & reporting 

SQL Server Audit policies at server level applies to all existing and newly created databases on the server. 

e) Identity and access management with Authentication 

- SQL logins 

1. A local windows user account or AD domain account - SQL Server relies upon Windows domain to authenticate the Windows user accounts. 

2. Windows group - granting access to a Windows group, it should grants access to all Windows user logins which are member of the group. 

3. SQL server login -> SQL Server stores the username & password (hash of the password) in the master db. 

4. Contained database users authenticate SQL server connections at the database level. A contained database is a database which is isolated 
from the other database and from the instance of SQL server which host the database. SQL Server supports contained database users for both Windows & SQL 
Server authentication. 

5. Principles of least priviledge (zero trust model) 

6. GMSA (group level managed service accounts) - provide the automated password management, SPN 

f) Data lineage & integrity 

use temporal tables to preserve the record version over the time to see the data as it was over the record's life span to provide the 
historical view of the application data. 

-> SQL Injection 

Recovery of SQL Server from failure 
-----------------------------------------

1. The database (a database restore completely) 

The whole database can be restored and recovered, and the database is offline during the restore and recovery operation. 

2. The data file (a file restore) 

a data file or a set of files can be restored and recovered. During a file restore, the filgroups which contains the files are automatically offline during 
the SQL database restoration time from crash/failure. Any attempt to access an offline filegroup causes an error. 

3. The data page (a page restore) 

under the full recovery model of SQL server, admins can restore individual pages, Page restores can be performed on any db, regardless of number of filegroups.


SQL Server db restoration scenarios
-----------------------------------

1. Complete database restore -> simply restoring and recovering the full database. 

2. File restore -> restore one or more damaged read-only files without restoring the entire database. File restore is available only if the 
database has at least one read-only filegroup. 

3. Page restore -> restores one or more damanged db pages. Page restore can be performed while the db is offline, once is the page has been restored, then 
it becomes online.  


