ColumnStore Index in SQL Server 

Standard for data storage, querying data from data warehouses like Fact tables & large dimension tables. 

Columnstore index is a tech stack which is used for storing, retrieval & managing of data using columnar data format. This is called a columnstore. 

Real time scenario 

1. a columnstore is data which's logically organized as a table with rows & columns, and physically stored in a column wise data format. 

Rowstore 

a rowstore is similar like columnstore which's stored as table with rows and columns, unlike columnstore, data is stored in a row wise format. 
In SQL server, the rowstore to a table where the underlying data storage is a heap / clustered index / memory optimized SQL server table. 

Rowgroup 

A group of SQL table data rows which are compressed into columnstore format at the same time. A rowgroup usually contains the max number of rows per rowgroup 
which's 1,048576 rows. 

JSON Data in SQL Server (SQL Server 2016)

SQL Server has built-in functions and operators, the functionalities are available with JSON data - 

1. Parse JSON document and to read and amend values through SQL server tables 
2. Transform arrays of JSON objects into table format. 
3. Execute any TSQL query on the converted JSON object. 
4. Format the output results of TSQL queries in JSON format. 

Spatial data types in SQL Server (SQL Server 2008 onwards)

1. geometry -> store the data on points, line, polygons etc. 
2. geography -> latitude & longitude. 

HiearchyID type (SQL Server 2008 onwards) 

subtree (binary tree with parent/child relationship) 


XML Data in SQL Server (SQL Server 2005 / 2008 onwards) 

1. In SQL Server, the XML data type , XML values can be stored natively in XML data type column which can be typed according to the XML schemas collection. 

The XML column within SQL server table can be indexed. 

- It has the ability to perform XML data stored within SQL columns and variables of the XML type using XQuery query. 

- bulk loading of XML data into SQL server tables using OPENROWSET function. 


Scenarios / Use cases for Clustered & Non Clustered Columnstore index 

1. for storing fact tables and large dimension tables for DW workloads. To improve query performance and data compression by 10x times. 

2. High compression of data is useful by using smaller in-memory footprint. Query performance can improve SQL server which can peform more query anddata operations in memory. 

3. Non-clustered columnstore index to perform the analysis on realtime basis for OLTP workloads. 

https://github.com/imcuteani/SQL_Server_Azure_Data_Engineering.git


SQL Server Platform Architecture 

1. Protocol Layer - (SNI) - responsible for facilitating the communication between SQL Server and client apps. 
This layer ensures that data is transferred correctly over the network through TCP named pipes (TCP protocol with port 1433). 

-> a) Shared memory -> a protocol for SQL server and client when in same machine. 
-> TCP/IP -> for most commonly used protocol for remote connetions to SQL server. It's reliable, scalable. 
-> Named pipes -> typically used for communication on the same machine or local network. It's less efficient than TCP/IP for remote connections. 
-> TDS -> (Tabular data stream) it's the protocol getting used by SQL server to facilitate the communication between client and SQL server database engine. 


2. Relation engine layer - responsible for managing , executing of SQL queries including data parsing, optimization and executing of SQL queries. 

-> CMD Parser -> converting the SQL statements into a format SQL server binary format. 

-> Optimizer -> deciding the most efficient way to execute the query. 

-> Query executor -> carrying out the actual work (retrieval or modifying the data) as per query plan. 

-> Transaction management -> ensuring the data consistency and integrity using ACID properties. 

3. Storage Engine - which manages how the data is stored, retrived and uploaded on disk. It works closly with relational engine (query processor) to ensure 
data is efficiently managed and protected in the database. 

The storage engine also handles the functionalities like data storage, transaction logging, data integrity, data durability, indexing and recovery. 

-> Data files -> Data files are the actual database content, like tables, views, SP, functions, system databases etc. organizes the data into filegroups. 
.mdf, .ndf, .ldf

-> Access method -> in the way the query processor retrives the data from the underlying storage (data files, tables, indexes) based on the query and 
available data. 

-> Buffer manager -> critical component responsible for managing the memory cache, how SQL server stores and retrieval of data pages to optimize 
the performance. The buffer manager is minimize the disk I/O operation by maintaning a pool of accessed database pages in memory. To speed up the data retrieval 
and reducing the disk access. 

-> database plan cache -> stores database execution plan generated by SQL server query optimizer. An execution plan is compiled representation of how SQL server
can perform scans, seek, joins, data filtering, sorting etc. 

-> Transaction manager -> the transaction manager is a critical component within SQL server ensuring the database transactions are executed as per 
ACID compliance. 